---
title: 'Article: 3 Tribes of Programming'
date: 2024-02-08T00:13:10+02:00
#draft = false
#tags = ['Coding', 'Learning']
#categories = ['Blog']
#series = ['Content Reviews']
cover_url: 'https://i.imgur.com/vrZNFIh.png'
---

This is a review of an [article classifying programmers into 3
archetypes](https://josephg.com/blog/3-tribes/) by Joseph Gentle. It is one of
the best articles I read recently, and potentially an all-time favorite. I had
always thought about this and even [wrote about it a little
bit](/posts/pragmatism-vs-idealism) (actually [more than
once](/posts/the-two-types-of-programmers/)), but I
think this article has a better way of fleshing out this concept.

So, let's get into it. But first...

## Why Bother?

Why am I so excited about this article and reviewing it in my own writing? And
why should you care as well?

Generally speaking, it's good, maybe even important, to learn about human
psychology and personalities. We're all different, and each of us has their own
way of thinking, their own ideals, and their own feelings towards certain
things. Learning more about that stuff can give you a better understanding of
yourself and people around you. It also affects the way you express yourself
and communicate with others.

This here is the same thing but specific to programming. These archetypes are
pretty much like personalities because each archetype represents a philosophy,
a style, and an overall set of principles and ideals that a programmer
prioritizes above all else. Differences between these tribes have been, and
will likely continue to be, the source of internet debates and flame wars. So,
it's good to not lose perspective and see where each side of a debate comes
from.

With that out of the way, let's talk about the actual tribes!

## The Poet

The author likens those "poets" to mathematicians. In terms of code, the poet's
highest priority is to write simple and beautiful code. It should clearly
express its intent, which brings itself more naturally the declarative (as
opposed to the imperative) paradigm. In terms of languages, Clojure gets a
mention (and its creator Rich Hickey) in that part of the article along with
Haskell. Unsurprisingly, all the languages mentioned and almost all of the
characterizations of the poet play very well with functional programming.

This archetype is what I previously referred to as the idealist, and if you
know me by any means, you could pretty much see that I strongly belong to this
category (and if you don't, you do now). His description of the poet focuses on
words and concepts that I would say myself or at least find fascinating when
others talk about it: things like language design, elegance, simplicity, etc.

Personally, what keeps drawing me closer to programming up to a point where I
want to seriously shift my career into software engineering is that it can feel
very close to maths at times while still being grounded in reality and not too
abstract or theoretical. The "mathiness" of code is especially true in
functional programming, and I wrote an [article about my fondness of
it](/posts/why-i-like-functional-programming). FP in
general, and functional languages in particular, combine a lot of theoretical
concepts to produce an elegant way of solving real world problems.

What's not great about poets, including myself, is that sometimes they get too
attached to their code to a degree where the UI or the product is merely a side
effect (which it literally is from that perspective). I do try my best to
prevent the poet persona from taking all over mine, especially when it comes to
work and money, but I will always be a strong poet at heart!

## The Hacker

The "hackers" are the ones who work at lower levels than the other two groups -
they play it close to hardware both in terms of the languages and their way of
thinking. Not surprisingly, they are more performance-oriented as well and
their code is usually imperative and full of mutations, because that is more or
less how hardware itself works. As the author states, this knowledge is
becoming less important in general, but the hackers still have their own
specialties like game development, embedded systems, etc.

This is the programmer archetype that I wasn't thinking of in my previous
contemplations, which is expected given that my experience only spans
statistical programming, web development, and some Linux tinkering here and
there. Also, the concepts that fascinate the hacker the most fascinate me the
least. I'm not that much into hardware and, being quite the poet type, I favor
the declarative paradigm over the imperative, which is admittedly farther from
the hardware's logic.

Interestingly, the author wrote about the conflicts between hackers and poets.
They are polar opposites when it comes to mutation. For hackers, mutation is
how hardware works, but poets (functional purists) think it's the root of all
evil. Garbage collectors are dead weight for hackers but less bugs for poets.
Abstraction obfuscates code for hackers but gives poets better ways of
reasoning about code.

## The Maker

In my article's phrasing, that would be the pragmatist who considers
programming only a means to an end. In that sense, "makers" only care about the
end-result: the product. While they *might* care about stuff that characterized
the other two groups, that stuff would be less important than shipping the
product. So, their priorities are speed of iteration and user experience.

As the author says, this is where the money is (mostly) and, consequently, most
professional software engineers belong to this camp. However, their
result-oriented nature is in heavy conflict with the two other groups, each for
their own reason. Their code can be messy and ugly for the poet and inefficient
for the hacker. Needless to say, this is the root of *lots* of online debates.
Another couple of interesting points raised by the author is that makers are
the most welcoming and forgiving community, and they can be a bit "soulless"
(stating that the latter accusation can be pointed to any of the 3 groups.)

While I proudly consider myself a poet, my current job has "polluted" the
purity of my poetic tendencies with some pragmatism. I've been dealing with
clients and non-technical management long enough to see some of their
perspective. Not only that, I even thought at a certain point that I was about
to be converted to this camp. While I *am* thankful for the little bit of
pragmatism in my current thinking, I found too much of it to be uncomfortable
for me. I allowed myself to be messy for the sake of making good products, but
I am not happy about that in retrospect.

All in all, I respect the practical and business aspects of programming and can
consider them in my coding, but never all the way.

## Conclusion

*"What makes a good programmer"* is a topic that has been under discussion and
debate for as long as (and even before) I got into this thing. The only
"correct" answer I could give is a general one: it means different things to
different people in different settings, so it absolutely depends! This article
should've formed a clearer picture as to why this is the case.

Hope you enjoyed the article!
