+++
title = 'Focus (or Lack Thereof)'
date = 2023-10-18T17:41:19+03:00
draft = false
series = ['Overthinking Development']
categories = ['Blog']
tags = ['Learning', 'Clojure', 'Go', 'JavaScript', 'R']
images = ['https://i.imgur.com/qYNiCBa.jpg']
+++

I find myself giving in to distractions from time to time when it comes to
technology choices and learning. It's some kind of FOMO - if you will. At this
point in my life, I've suffered too much of it, and it's mostly not a pleasant
experience. So, I'll try to organize my shuffling thoughts in this article to
make a relatively coherent picture of why this happens to me and also why maybe
it's not all bad.

I consider this to be something of a follow-up to an article named [Jack of All
Trades](/posts/jack-of-all-trades/), which was more about my current skill set
and my ideal (technical) goals. This one is more about the reasons behind my
having such a skill set.

## Curiosity

I don't want to say that I have too much curiosity in me, but I *will* say that
maybe I directed it in (possibly) too many places. I have been a statistical
programmer for years, writing R code to wrangle, analyze, and report data in
clinical research. However, I always had something else on the side that varied
from time to time. Sometimes, it's a new programming language like Python or
JavaScript, and other times it has been a different kind of experiment with
software like changing my OS from Windows to Linux or using Vim or Emacs
instead of RStudio and VSCode.

That kind of hopping around tends to be exciting in the first stages of playing
with a new piece of software. My curiosity is being sated that way after all.
However, it tends to cause some fatigue - and possibly burnout - after some
time, especially when I start learning too many new things in a short time or
even simultaneously. It gets even more frustrating when I look back at the past
couple of months and see no tangible achievement... Nothing except just playing
around with different technologies and going back to square one.

Let me be clear that I don't regret that kind of experimentation, though. I am
almost certain that I am a better programmer because of it. However, I keep
thinking that I would've been better off directing my curiosity away from a
small number of things to learn and put it into perfecting what I primarily do
for a living. What is a bit problematic is that it can take me years of
on-and-off interactions with a certain piece of software before deciding that I
will (or won't) stick with it forever. But the good thing is that when I make a
decision like that, I strongly believe in it because now I know I *chose* it
and not just accepted whatever landed first in front of me.

I have successfully made such decisions in the past. R will remain my favorite
statistics and data science language, and Neovim is now ultimately my favorite
editor. As for web development, I stopped focusing on JavaScript for now (more
on that in a minute), and I am currently exploring the back-end: first Clojure
and now Go. Hopefully, the current programming base I am standing on now will
help me hop around and make that decision faster because I don't want to take a
couple more years being indecisive (I have high hopes for Go, though).

## (JavaScript) Noise

The software development space generally progresses very fast, but I believe
the fastest progression currently happens in the JavaScript ecosystem. I don't
know if this is true, but my perspective is now the JS community has the
strongest obsession with solving problems by developing completely new tools.
Since I've been more focused on the front-end for the past year or two, I am
pretty sure JavaScript's noise has been a real factor in the frustration I'm
currently having.

I try my best not to invest too much time into whatever the new hot thing is,
but as long as I am exposed to JS communities and online content, these things
will find a way into my life one way or another. Even an individual framework
will have its fair share of noise and fast updates that keep pushing you to
keep up with this fast train.

I did talk about JS noise briefly in the [Developer
Philosophies](/posts/developer-philosophies/) article, although I wrote that
one the context of learning Clojure at the time. But one thing I didn't mention
is that the degree of impact of that noise varies from one person to another.
Some people don't care at all and are just in it to get a job doing React or
something. I, for better or worse, care about languages for languages' sake.
Some people actually are excited about the fast development of the ecosystem. I
(over-) think about the way I get to express myself in code, and I pay a lot of
attention to a language's common philosophies and practices (and I contemplated
that topic in yet another article called [Pragmatism vs
Idealism](/posts/pragmatism-vs-idealism/)).

I kinda got frustrated by the fact that I couldn't get to consistently adopt a
single one of the hundred JS philosophies. I liked Svelte very much but I
couldn't use it in my work projects because it would be hard to try to recruit
someone to specialize in Svelte. Then I had to use React, tried to buy into it
and enjoy it, but couldn't. Then, a couple of months later, Svelte announces
new syntax to do things. It's like the rug will always be pulled from under me.
Not the greatest experience ever.

So, that's why right now I'm leaning towards settling for the current JS skills
I have and checking out the back-end as it seems to be a much more stable, much
quieter place to live in. I don't think I'll ever stop interacting with
JavaScript. If I keep working solo, I will sure have to develop front-ends.
I'll have to wait and see about that.


## Career

These days I am kind of obsessing over the idea of bootstrapping any sort of
business using my software development skills, no matter how small or what
business model. After all, I am building useful skills, and especially now
after starting to learn back-end development, I will have gained a relatively
complete full-stack experience. So, why not put these skills to good use and
generate some income? (Side note: I know that the "full" stack could be much
more complicated than just a front-end, a back-end, and a database, but still
what I know should be enough for a first-pass production deployment.)

The thing is, starting a business requires *a lot* more than development
skills: these are just the means to execute the product. I could argue starting
a business is way harder than searching for a job. So as a result, I have more
topics than ever to study. I need to learn more about the business side of
things: how to build successful products, possible business models and
different venues to execute them. Not to mention that I actually need to get
better on the technical side because some products are too complicated for a
beginner-to-intermediate developer.

But I believe there is one possible advantage to becoming more
business-oriented, and that is it might get me to stop - or at least reduce -
any unnecessary tech-hopping. I think that people who want to get a job or
build a product can easily have more focus because there are some factors that
can direct and inform the decision of what to learn. So, if I want to be
successful at building a certain type of software products, I will have to
choose the tech stack that will help me achieve this easily, quickly, and
safely. There is still a lot of subjectivity to these things, but surely not as
much as coding for fun

## Next Steps

So, after I rambled on for a while, I can say that I am trying (as much as I
can) to focus on a couple of things at this stage of my learning journey:
Golang, back-end development, and building software products for potential
profit. Will that change in the future? Knowing my nature, I'd say yes but not
in the near future, I hope. I am trying to be more disciplined in the way I do
things, but I don't want to lose passion either.

* * *

Cover image generated with [Leonardo AI](https://leonardo.ai/)
